---
title: "Why declining population is bad"
date: 2022-08-03T16:03:38-05:00
draft: false
---

Recently, there has been a lot of online discussions happening about falling birth rate, under population and whether it is a blessing or a curse. The source of these hot debates was, of course, Elon Musk. Throughout the years, Elon has stated on multiple occasions that he was concerned with low birth rate, and that civilization is going to crumble without more children. Many online voices questioned his claim. Some do not think that declining birthrate is an issue given that the world population is now close to 8 billion as of 2022.
 
* Failing birthrate does not mean just a declining birthrate but also an aging population. If the population declined from 8 billion now to 4 billion like it was in 1975, it wouldn't have nearly the same age structure as it did then. Instead, it will have a much higher percentage of old people. That is a big big problem. Most of society's productivity and resources will go to caring for old people who no longer produce or produce less goods and services. Basically, the world's resources will be less dedicated to creating new things, pushing new boundaries, and discovering new knowledge. Instead, for better or worse, they will be dedicated more toward keeping unproductive people alive. Characterizing old people as unproductive people sounds mean and ungrateful. However, it is a fact. The resources here are not just material resources. They include human resources too. Young people will have to work more and harder to pay for old people's needs through tax, caregiving, and products.
 
* Worse, a world with more old people means a world with more political, cultural power in the hands of the elderly. Such a world will naturally look backward more than forward and slowly degrade in terms of culture and perspective. Having more burden and less power, the young will naturally resent the old. That can lead to political and social instability.
 
* Worse, the world population declines but it doesn't decline uniformly geographically. Birthrate and population declines fastest in the richer part of the world. Not so much or even increasing in poorer countries. If this situation continues, two scenarios can happen. First, rich countries will have to allow more immigration from poor countries. Even the US, a country with a long history, lots of experience and cultural capacity to absorb a large amount of immigrations, is struggling with many problems that multiculturalism brings, regardless of what the leftist woke activists say, problems ranging from decline social capital, civil society to polarized politics, growing inequality, divided society, just to name a few. Unless we can somehow learn to quickly assimilate a large number of people from completely different backgrounds, I'm afraid such a future will be one of constant social instability and conflicts. The second scenario: refugees and other forms of illegal migration. This will be similar to the first scenario but worse since it will involve tons of violence and human tragedy.
 
Overall, I agree with Elon. A declining birthrate will be unlikely to be the paradise that environmentalists imagine. It will be a backward looking, conservative world, lacking hope, optimism, and full of conflicts and miseries.